doc/ABMsInClojure.md, before:

ABMsInClojure.md
===
## Notes on writing agent-based models in Clojure

Marshall Abrams

These remarks are the result of my sometimes biased intuitions and
unsystematic, un-thorough research---which may be outdated.

### What are ABMs?

"Agent-based model" (ABM) and "individual-based model" are used to that
refer to simulations that usually involve a large number of interacting
"agents", i.e. software entities whose behaviors are determined by
(usually) relatively simple bits of code.  What's interesting about ABMs
is seeing what happens when a lot of agents interact over time.  That's
a vague description of the paradigm, but the boundaries of the category
are necessarily vague.  I've seen ABMs in which the agents represent
people, or entities within minds, or companies, or associations of
villages in Bali, or proteins within E. coli, etc.  Those are ones that
come to mind.

Often ABMs have a graphical component, so that you can watch the agents
interacting over time.  This isn't essential, but being able to watch
the simulation play out helps you understand what happens, fine tune the
model, and investigate particular model runs in more detail.  (Often
there are random elements in ABM simulations, and any good ABM system
will use a pseudorandom number generator that allows you record PRNG
seeds and use them to replay particular runs.)  On the other hand, once
you know what you are doing with a model, you might want to perform a
series of runs and record data from them.  This will be faster if you
can turn off the graphical component.

NetLogo is a very popular modeling environment and language for
agent-based modeling.  (The language is pretty easy to learn, and the
language and environment have many features designed to make agent-based
modeling easy.  For example, if you use the built in agents, a graphical
display will automatically be created.) So if you want to get a feel for
common patterns in agent-based modeling, download NetLogo or run the web
version, and experiment with various sample models available in the
Models Library dropdown.  There are docs and source code for each on the
Info and Code tabs, respectively.



### FP and ABMs: general challenges

A central idea of agent-based models is that agents persist over time,
and that their internal states change, or their relationships to each
other and the environment change, or all of the above.  For example, a
model might include organisms with internal energy levels that change,
and that move around in an environment.

It's very natural to model agents as persistent data structures with
internal states that are imperatively modified, and to treat the
environment in which they move as a persistent data structure in which
agents' locations are imperatively modified.  There are various ways to
do just this in Clojure, but you lose a lot of the conveniences of that
Clojure provides.  For example, you can define agents as `deftypes` that
are set up to be imperatively modified, or you can put atoms in the
fields of a `defrecord`, but `deftypes` are less convienient that
`defrecords`, and constantly `swap`ing on atoms clutters your code.

TALK ABOUT IDENTITY OVER TIME HERE

For an environment, you can use a core.matrix or Java matrices or arrays
that you modify imperatively.  This is OK, but you have to be careful.
It is sometimes reasonable to update environments functionally; this
works if you can structure your code so that all changes of
relationships to the environment or of relationships between agents
happen simultaneously.  For some models, this will be unreasonable,
though.  In practice, even if you structure you code to update large-scale
things like positions in environments in a functional manner, you will
probably want to do selected updates imperatively.




### Agent-based modeling in Clojure?

You can write an ABM in any language, of course, but it's nicer if you
have a library or environment that's designed for ABMs.  This is why,
although I have written an ABM in pure Clojure, I probably won't do that
again.

There is a list of ABM libraries and environments here:

en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/comparison_of_agent-based_modeling_software

It's a long list, but many of the tools are designed for special, narrow
purposes, and many seem to be old and probably not well maintained.

AFAIK there are no ABM libraries written in Clojure.  I don't expect
to see any soon, since the intersection of those interested in Clojure
and in ABMs seems small.

However, there are a few Java ABM libraries, and at least one Javascript
(Coffeescript, actually) ABM library.  So one can consider using them
with Clojure.


### Agentscript

This is an ABM library written in Coffeescript.  I have experimented a
little bit with using it with Clojurescript.  That seemed pretty easy
once I figued out how Agentscript worked.  (The docs were not ideal.)
Agentscript seems like a nice library, but I decided I wanted more
than it offerred, and I decided to use a Java library.


### Java ABM libraries:

In choosing Java ABM libraries, I don't want to try to investigate
anything that doesn't seem to be widely used and currently maintained.
Someone else might want to cast a wider net, and might find something
very worthwhile to use, but I don't have time.

Using this heuristic, there are exactly two Java ABM libraries worth
considering for use with Clojure:  Repast, and MASON.  Both seem to be
used quite a bit in the ABM community.

I investigated Repast a little bit, and the design and documentation
didn't appeal to me.  It seemed more confusing to use than MASON.  I
might be wrong about that, but I decided to use MASON.

(Could you use NetLogo from Clojure?  NetLogo is written in Java and
Scala, so in theory you could call it from Clojure.  There are a few
well-defined ways to interact with NetLogo from external code, too.  You
could write custom extensions in Clojure, for example.  However, what
one really wants is a general interface between Clojure and the NetLogo
language, since that DSL is the interface to all of NetLogo's ABM
capabilities.  Implementing a Clojure-to-NetLogoDSL interface would be a
lot of work.  It's easier to use Clojure with an ABM library that's
designed to allow you to write models in Java itself.)


### MASON

MASON is a well thought out, well-designed, very flexible ABM
library, imo.  Clojure is a well thought out, well-designed, very
flexible language.  However, MASON's design uses a lot of inheritance,
and has some other features that make it a bit awkward to use with
Clojure.  Some of the difficulties are due to the the FP-orientation of
Clojure, and the fact that there's no reason that a Java ABM library
should worry about FP concerns.  Some of the difficulties come from the
fact that some of the ways in which "Clojure is an opinionated language"
is that it is not intented to make it easy to deal with certain kinds of
common Java design.

Item 1: If you add some Bean-style accessors for model parameters,
MASON will automatically tie them to GUI elements, so that you can
control the model from the GUI.  This is very nice.  However, the
accessors have to be tied to data that would normally be stored in a
subclass of MASON's SimState class.  In addition, it appears that the
only way to get all of the effects of subclassing that are needed is to
use the poorly documented, black art of `genclass`.  `proxy`, `reify`,
`defrecord`, and `deftype` are not enough.  What this means is that for
each model parameter that you want controlled from the GUI, you will
probably want:

1. A map, defrecord, etc. that you place in the single instance
variable allowed by `genclass`, containing a data element for each 
parameter.

2. An instances state initialization function that initalizes each of
those data elements.

3. At least two accessor functions for each data element.

4. A declaration for each of these functions in the `:methods` element
of the `genclass` map.

If you also want to be able to set these parameters from the command
line, then you'll also need:

5. Corresponding elements in your configuration for `clojure.tools.cli`
or whatever method you use for processing command line options.

When you add or change anything concerning model parameters, you may
have to update all of the above at the same time.


I defined a big macro, `defparam`, to write all of this code and keep it
coordinated.  `defparam` is a work in progress.


Item 2: The natural thing to do is to define your agents using
`defrecord`.  This can work quite well.  It means that when you
you are doing functional and not imperative updating to agents'
internal states, but you can just update the arrays that 
MASON expects agents to live in, and it will dutifully display the
agents in the GUI, ignoring the fact that you removed an old agentt
and inserted a brand new one that represents the same entity as far as
you are concerned.

However, this will break down if you want to use MASON's built-in method
for displaying an agent's internal state while it runs.  You can
double-click on an agent in the GUI, and it will be highlighted and you
will see its internal variables in another window.  This is very useful
sometimes.  This doesn't work with `defrecord` agents because when you
decide to "watch" an agent, MASON stores a pointer to it, and when you
do a functional update of the defrecord, the pointer now points to
the old version of the agent, which will never change.  You could
instead use a `deftype`, but then you lose the many conveniences of
defrecords, and Clojure becomes less fun, ... and less Clojurely.
Since I bother trying to write ABMs with MASON only because I want to
have the convenience and fun of working Clojure, this is not an option
I like.

Fortunately, MASON provides a workaround for this situation; you can
define a method that MASON can call to get the current state of an
agent, but it's a bit of work to write.

(The other problem with defrecords occurs if you want your agents to
move with continuous coordinates rather than on a grid.  MASON
implements continuous coordinates with a hashtable, hashing on the
identity of the agent.  The hash function that Clojure defines for
defrecords causes the hash to be defined over all of the contents of
the defrecord instance's fields.  This is slow compared to hashing on
a pointer.  You can speed things up by using deftypes, but see above.
However, many ABMs either don't involve movement or use movement on a
grid, which doesn't involve hashing.)

Commit message:

added reference to defagent, make-properties

doc/ABMsInClojure.md, after:

ABMsInClojure.md
===
## Notes on writing agent-based models in Clojure

Marshall Abrams

These remarks are the result of my sometimes biased intuitions and
unsystematic, un-thorough research---which may be outdated.

### What are ABMs?

"Agent-based model" (ABM) and "individual-based model" are used to that
refer to simulations that usually involve a large number of interacting
"agents", i.e. software entities whose behaviors are determined by
(usually) relatively simple bits of code.  What's interesting about ABMs
is seeing what happens when a lot of agents interact over time.  That's
a vague description of the paradigm, but the boundaries of the category
are necessarily vague.  I've seen ABMs in which the agents represent
people, or entities within minds, or companies, or associations of
villages in Bali, or proteins within E. coli, etc.  Those are ones that
come to mind.

Often ABMs have a graphical component, so that you can watch the agents
interacting over time.  This isn't essential, but being able to watch
the simulation play out helps you understand what happens, fine tune the
model, and investigate particular model runs in more detail.  (Often
there are random elements in ABM simulations, and any good ABM system
will use a pseudorandom number generator that allows you record PRNG
seeds and use them to replay particular runs.)  On the other hand, once
you know what you are doing with a model, you might want to perform a
series of runs and record data from them.  This will be faster if you
can turn off the graphical component.

NetLogo is a very popular modeling environment and language for
agent-based modeling.  (The language is pretty easy to learn, and the
language and environment have many features designed to make agent-based
modeling easy.  For example, if you use the built in agents, a graphical
display will automatically be created.) So if you want to get a feel for
common patterns in agent-based modeling, download NetLogo or run the web
version, and experiment with various sample models available in the
Models Library dropdown.  There are docs and source code for each on the
Info and Code tabs, respectively.



### FP and ABMs: general challenges

A central idea of agent-based models is that agents persist over time,
and that their internal states change, or their relationships to each
other and the environment change, or all of the above.  For example, a
model might include organisms with internal energy levels that change,
and that move around in an environment.

It's very natural to model agents as persistent data structures with
internal states that are imperatively modified, and to treat the
environment in which they move as a persistent data structure in which
agents' locations are imperatively modified.  There are various ways to
do just this in Clojure, but you lose a lot of the conveniences of that
Clojure provides.  For example, you can define agents as `deftypes` that
are set up to be imperatively modified, or you can put atoms in the
fields of a `defrecord`, but `deftypes` are less convienient that
`defrecords`, and constantly `swap`ing on atoms clutters your code.

TALK ABOUT IDENTITY OVER TIME HERE

For an environment, you can use a core.matrix or Java matrices or arrays
that you modify imperatively.  This is OK, but you have to be careful.
It is sometimes reasonable to update environments functionally; this
works if you can structure your code so that all changes of
relationships to the environment or of relationships between agents
happen simultaneously.  For some models, this will be unreasonable,
though.  In practice, even if you structure you code to update large-scale
things like positions in environments in a functional manner, you will
probably want to do selected updates imperatively.




### Agent-based modeling in Clojure?

You can write an ABM in any language, of course, but it's nicer if you
have a library or environment that's designed for ABMs.  This is why,
although I have written an ABM in pure Clojure, I probably won't do that
again.

There is a list of ABM libraries and environments here:

en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/comparison_of_agent-based_modeling_software

It's a long list, but many of the tools are designed for special, narrow
purposes, and many seem to be old and probably not well maintained.

AFAIK there are no ABM libraries written in Clojure.  I don't expect
to see any soon, since the intersection of those interested in Clojure
and in ABMs seems small.

However, there are a few Java ABM libraries, and at least one Javascript
(Coffeescript, actually) ABM library.  So one can consider using them
with Clojure.


### Agentscript

This is an ABM library written in Coffeescript.  I have experimented a
little bit with using it with Clojurescript.  That seemed pretty easy
once I figued out how Agentscript worked.  (The docs were not ideal.)
Agentscript seems like a nice library, but I decided I wanted more
than it offerred, and I decided to use a Java library.


### Java ABM libraries:

In choosing Java ABM libraries, I don't want to try to investigate
anything that doesn't seem to be widely used and currently maintained.
Someone else might want to cast a wider net, and might find something
very worthwhile to use, but I don't have time.

Using this heuristic, there are exactly two Java ABM libraries worth
considering for use with Clojure:  Repast, and MASON.  Both seem to be
used quite a bit in the ABM community.

I investigated Repast a little bit, and the design and documentation
didn't appeal to me.  It seemed more confusing to use than MASON.  I
might be wrong about that, but I decided to use MASON.

(Could you use NetLogo from Clojure?  NetLogo is written in Java and
Scala, so in theory you could call it from Clojure.  There are a few
well-defined ways to interact with NetLogo from external code, too.  You
could write custom extensions in Clojure, for example.  However, what
one really wants is a general interface between Clojure and the NetLogo
language, since that DSL is the interface to all of NetLogo's ABM
capabilities.  Implementing a Clojure-to-NetLogoDSL interface would be a
lot of work.  It's easier to use Clojure with an ABM library that's
designed to allow you to write models in Java itself.)


### MASON

MASON is a well thought out, well-designed, very flexible ABM
library, imo.  Clojure is a well thought out, well-designed, very
flexible language.  However, MASON's design uses a lot of inheritance,
and has some other features that make it a bit awkward to use with
Clojure.  Some of the difficulties are due to the the FP-orientation of
Clojure, and the fact that there's no reason that a Java ABM library
should worry about FP concerns.  Some of the difficulties come from the
fact that some of the ways in which "Clojure is an opinionated language"
is that it is not intented to make it easy to deal with certain kinds of
common Java design.

Item 1: If you add some Bean-style accessors for model parameters,
MASON will automatically tie them to GUI elements, so that you can
control the model from the GUI.  This is very nice.  However, the
accessors have to be tied to data that would normally be stored in a
subclass of MASON's SimState class.  In addition, it appears that the
only way to get all of the effects of subclassing that are needed is to
use the poorly documented, black art of `genclass`.  `proxy`, `reify`,
`defrecord`, and `deftype` are not enough.  What this means is that for
each model parameter that you want controlled from the GUI, you will
probably want:

1. A map, defrecord, etc. that you place in the single instance
variable allowed by `genclass`, containing a data element for each 
parameter.

2. An instances state initialization function that initalizes each of
those data elements.

3. At least two accessor functions for each data element.

4. A declaration for each of these functions in the `:methods` element
of the `genclass` map.

If you also want to be able to set these parameters from the command
line, then you'll also need:

5. Corresponding elements in your configuration for `clojure.tools.cli`
or whatever method you use for processing command line options.

When you add or change anything concerning model parameters, you may
have to update all of the above at the same time.


I defined a big macro, `defparam`, to write all of this code and keep it
coordinated.  `defparam` is a work in progress.


Item 2: The natural thing to do is to define your agents using
`defrecord`.  This can work quite well.  It means that when you
you are doing functional and not imperative updating to agents'
internal states, but you can just update the arrays that 
MASON expects agents to live in, and it will dutifully display the
agents in the GUI, ignoring the fact that you removed an old agentt
and inserted a brand new one that represents the same entity as far as
you are concerned.

However, this will break down if you want to use MASON's built-in method
for displaying an agent's internal state while it runs.  You can
double-click on an agent in the GUI, and it will be highlighted and you
will see its internal variables in another window.  This is very useful
sometimes.  This doesn't work with `defrecord` agents because when you
decide to "watch" an agent, MASON stores a pointer to it, and when you
do a functional update of the defrecord, the pointer now points to
the old version of the agent, which will never change.  You could
instead use a `deftype`, but then you lose the many conveniences of
defrecords, and Clojure becomes less fun, ... and less Clojurely.
Since I bother trying to write ABMs with MASON only because I want to
have the convenience and fun of working Clojure, this is not an option
I like.

Fortunately, MASON provides a workaround for this situation; you can
define a method that MASON can call to get the current state of an
agent, but it's a bit of work to write.  I defined a function
`make-properties` and a macro `defparams` to do most of the work for
you.

(The other problem with defrecords occurs if you want your agents to
move with continuous coordinates rather than on a grid.  MASON
implements continuous coordinates with a hashtable, hashing on the
identity of the agent.  The hash function that Clojure defines for
defrecords causes the hash to be defined over all of the contents of
the defrecord instance's fields.  This is slow compared to hashing on
a pointer.  You can speed things up by using deftypes, but see above.
However, many ABMs either don't involve movement or use movement on a
grid, which doesn't involve hashing.)
