doc/general/ClojureMASONinteropTips.md, before:

Tips for using MASON with Clojure
====
Marshall Abrams

## Where to start?

These notes don't provide introductions or tutorials for Clojure or
MASON.  MASON has a detailed PDF manual that begins with a tutorial and
a example.

To read the MASON manual, you'll need to know a little bit of Java or
have enough experience to figure it out as you read.  (My "majure" repo
includes some Clojure implementations of the Students example from the
MASON tutorial.)

You will also have to learn a bit more about Clojure-Java interop than
is usually necessary, but studying the source under masonclj's *example*
directory with the MASON manual, the MASON classdocs tree, and good
Clojure interop resources at hand might be a reasonable learning strategy.


## Sequences, etc.

Any Java class that implements `java.util.Collection` can be used
with Clojure sequence/list-oriented functions: `map`, `reduce`,
`filter`, `vec`, etc.  This is very convenient--for example for working
with the contents of a MASON `sim.util.Bag`.

Clojure allows you to create Java arrays of primitives using
functions such as `double-array`.  You can set values in arrays of
primitives efficiently using functions such as `aset-double`.
You can access the values efficiently using `aset` with type hints.

Many Clojure functions generate lazy sequences.  One has to be very
careful with these when dealing with mutable state.  Sometimes it's a
good idea to wrap a result in `doall` to cause a lazy sequence to be
realized immediately.



## Setting the name in the title bar

### How to do it

MASON sets the title of the main window by calling `getName()` in the
subclass of `GUIState`, if that function exists.  `getName` should
return a string.  If `getName()` is missing, MASON sets the window title
to the (unqualified) class name of the subclass.

`getName()` is static in `GUIState`.  You can't actually override a
static method, normally, in the sense that the method to run would be
chosen at runtime by the actual class used.  Rather, with a static
method, the declared class of a variable determines at compile time
which method to call.  *But* MASON uses reflection to figure out which
method to call at runtime.  Nevertheless, this means that we need a
declaration in :methods, which you would not do for overriding
non-static methods from a superclass.  Also, the declaration should be
declared static using metadata placed *before the entire declaration
vector*.

```
(ns 
  ...
  (:gen-class 
    ...
    :methods [^:static [getName [] java.lang.String]] ; see comment on the implementation below
 ))

...

(defn -getName [] "example app")
```

See https://stackoverflow.com/questions/26425098/how-to-generate-generate-static-methods-with-clojures-gen-class
for the syntax for declaring a method static in `gen-class`.


### How not to do it

The preceding means that you don't have to and should not do the
followint (which would be natural in other contexts).

When a method has multiple arities in the super, you you can use a
Clojure multiple-arity method.  But if there are different *types* to
the arguments, then you have to distinguish them by tacking type
specifiers on to the name of the method!

Example:

```
(defn -getName-void [this] "free-agent") 
```

See:

https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/clojure/TVRsy4Gnf70

https://puredanger.github.io/tech.puredanger.com/2011/08/12/subclassing-in-clojure (in which Alex Miller of all people learns from random others)

http://stackoverflow.com/questions/32773861/clojure-gen-class-for-overloaded-and-overridden-methods

http://dishevelled.net/Tricky-uses-of-Clojure-gen-class-and-AOT-compilation.html


## Lessons from the Students model

The following remarks came from experiments implementing MASON's Students
example in Clojure (see the <a
href="https://github.com/mars0i/majure">majure</a> repo).  Specific
versions of the Students model mentioned below can be found in that
repo.

This document reflects my focus at the time on producing Clojure/MASON
code  that was as fast as possible.  After the majure experiments, I
applied what I'd learned in the <a
href="https://github.com/mars0i/intermittran">intermittran</a> repo.
The resulting code in intermittran is not very idiomatic to Clojure, and
unpleasant, imo.  My current approach is to worry more about trying to
write (relatively) idiomatic Clojure than trying to eke out as much
speed from MASON as possible, but this  document provides the background
for my current approach.

Specifically, my goal was to see what's involved in writing a MASON
simulation using only Clojure by using Clojure to rewrite the Students
simulation in chapter 2 of the v18 MASON manual.  In the *majure* git
repo there are several versions of Students--each exploring different
ways of writing the Students simulation.

These notes aren't intended to be self-explanatory to someone who's
unfamiliar with Clojure or unfamiliar with MASON, and it may be that there
are errors, since I'm not on expert on Clojure, Java, or MASON.


### General

Note that while Clojure emphasizes pure functional programming, MASON is
designed for routine use of mutable data structures.  I didn't try to
fight this aspect of MASON in my versions of the Students simulation,
but I did try to make it clear in my code what parts were purely
functional and what parts were not.  It's important to have a clear view
of this distinction; otherwise mixing with Clojure's lazy sequences are
likely to cause problems at some point.

Clojure makes it very easy to call methods on Java classes using its
Clojure's dot syntax.  The notes below focus on less simple aspects of
Clojure-Java interop, including more intimate Clojure-Java
interoperability involving subclassing, interface implementation, and
defining methods so that they can be found by MASON's Java classes.


### Students

There are four classes defined in the Students simulation:

* `Student`, which implements `sim.engine.Steppable`
* `Students`, which extends `sim.engine.SimState`
* `StudentsWithUI`, which extends `sim.display.GUIState`.
* An inner class in `Students`, which implements `Steppable`.

I tried out various methods to define these classes in Clojure.
In the end, I settled on using the `gen-class` macro to define
`Students` and `StudentsWithUI`, `deftype` to define `Students`, and
`reify` to define the inner class.  Other options are possible for the
last two cases.  See below for details.


### Classes

There are five ways to make classes in Clojure:

* `defrecord`
* `deftype`
* `reify`
* `proxy`
* `gen-class`

The *alternativeStudentClasses* version of my Students-in-Clojure
program contains files illustrating alternative ways of defining the
`Student` class using each of these options.  See the README.me file in
that directory for information about their speed differences.

All of the five class creation macros allow implementing interfaces.
but only `proxy` and `gen-class` allow you to extend a class (such as
`SimState`).  However, `proxy` is potentially the slowest of the five
methods, because it uses an extra level of indirection to execute
methods, and it's more limited than `gen-class` in many ways.  I think
that `proxy` is unlikely to be a good choice for use with MASON if you
want optimal speed, but it might be useful in the GUI, if you don't care
about optimal speed there.  You can use `reify` instead, for example, to
create a Clojure equivalent of an inner class, if the class doesn't need
to extend a class. Neither `reify` nor `proxy` has built-in ways to
store state, though you may be able to use a closure, perhaps with atoms
or some other reference type, to associate state with a `reify` or
`proxy` object.

Note that I tried using `reify`, `proxy`, and `gen-class` to define the
inner class in `Students`.  They were all equally fast.  I suspect that
the `proxy` version was no slower simply because this class doesn't do
much.  Note that `proxy` was much slower than `reify` when used to
define the `Student` class in *alternativeStudentClasses*.

Overall, `gen-class` is the most flexible way to create classes in
Clojure, but it's the most complicated method, as well.  I used it
define `Students`, subclassing `SimState`, and to define
`StudentsWithUI`, subclassing `GUIState`.  I don't think `proxy` can do
everything needed for these cases.

`defrecord` is routinely used in Clojure.  `deftype` provides similar
basic functionality.  Both can be used to define a named class that
implements interfaces, but neither can extend another class.  In my
tests with Students, `deftype` was a lot faster than `defrecord`
(2X-4X).

The reason for the speed difference between `defrecord` and `deftype`
is interesting.  `defrecord` and `deftype` are equally fast at
(immutable) field access, and I see no reason to think they would
differ in method invocation speed.  However, `defrecord` automatically
defines some associated functions that `deftype` does not.  Among
other things, `defrecord` defines Java `equals()` and `hashCode()`
methods so that they will reflect the contents of a record's fields,
and not just its bare identity.  This means, for example, that two
distinct records of the same type and the same field contents will be
`=` in Clojure, while distinct `deftype` objects with the same
contents will not.  In addition, I believe, computing a hash code or
equality for a record is more expensive than for a `deftype` object. 
Some of the MASON data structure objects used in the Students
simulation, such as `Continuous2D`, use hashtables.  I believe that's
the reason that `deftype` is so much faster than `defrecord` in
Students.  (Note that although you can override some `Object` methods
on records, you can't override `hashCode()` and `equals()`.)  The
lesson is that *if* you need a named class that doesn't extend a
class, *and* you are using something like `Continuous2D` that uses
hashtables to store agents, then you have to decide whether you'd
rather have the speed of `deftype` or the additional functionality of
`defrecord` (e.g. the ability to initialize new instances from Clojure
maps).  [Steven Yi and others on the Clojure Google group helped me to
understand all  of this.]  If your agents are stored on a grid with a
finite number of cells, however, this difference between `defrecord`
and `deftype` probably won't matter.  MASON implements this kind of
grid with Java arrays, and finding an object in arrays just involves
indexing into them.


### Mutable state

Only `deftype` allows mutable fields, and only using the
`:unsynchronized-mutable` or `:volatile-mutable` keywords.  (There is a
scary warning about these options in the docstring for `deftype`, but my
understanding is that these options are unproblematic as long as you're
not going to have multiple threads accessing the same field.)

(`gen-class` allows you to define a single field using the `:state`
keyword, but it's `final` in Java terms, which is to say that it can't
be changed after it's initialized by the function that you declare
using the `:init` keyword.)

One way to get an effect like multiple mutable fields with `gen-class`,
`defrecord`, or non-mutable fields with `deftype`, is to use one of
Clojure's reference types.  

For example, to have mutable state with `gen-class`, you can store
Clojure atoms in a Clojure `defrecord` object that's stored in the state
variable.

Another alternative is to store a `deftype` object  with mutable fields
in the state variable.  `deftype` with mutable fields was a little bit
faster than `defrecord` with atoms; I used `deftype` to go from 50% of
Java speed to 60% of Java speed.  (Using `deftype` for this purpose is
very verbose, though--I ended up with four similar signatures for each
field.  It might be worth writing a macro to generate all of the
relevant code.  This is a little tricky, though, if you want to use type
hints--which you do, if you're going to the trouble of using mutable
fields with `deftype` just for a small additional performance benefit.)

Another alternative is to store data in the state field using Java
arrays, which you can create in Clojure using functions such as
`make-array` and `double-array`.

Note that there's no problem with using fields inherited from a
superclass defined in Java from within the same Clojure class definition
(usually: the same namespace).  They can be accessed as if they were
Java methods called from Clojure, i.e. with expressions such as
`(.random students)` to get the random number generator defined in the
SimState superclass of the `Students`.  You can modify these instance
variables using `set!`.


### Interfaces

The are three ways to define interfaces:

* `defprotocol`
* `definterface`
* `gen-interface`

For use with MASON, it's not clear that it matters whether you use
`defprotocol` or `definterface`.  I've gotten the same speed with both.
`definterface` requires that you use type specifications.  Type hints
are allowed but ignored on `defprotocol`.  `defprotocol` provides more
conveniences for use with Clojure.

`gen-interface` allows you to extend another interface, but
this probably isn't needed.  For example, it was easy to define
`Student` implement both `Steppable` and an interface I defined.
(`definterface` is a simple wrapper around `gen-interface`, and it's
probably better style to use `definterface` if you don't need
`gen-interface`'s extra functionality.  However, unlike `gen-class`,
`gen-interface` is simple to use.)


### Type hints

Type hints *can* sometimes make a *huge* difference in speed, when used
to avoid reflection in code that executes often.  `(set!
*warn-on-reflection* true)` will turn on reflection compilation
warnings.  I try to restrict type hints to use in and near parameter
lists, but sometimes I've needed to stick them in the middle of a
function's code.  Sometimes you can avoid type hints using
`definterface` or `gen-interface` (and maybe `defprotocol`--I'm not
sure).


### Cyclic dependencies

Clojure doesn't allow compile-time cyclic dependencies between
classes. For example, without type hints, giving the `Students` and
`Student` classes their own namespaces (in separate source files, as
usual) worked fine.  These classes refer to each other's methods and
fields repeatedly, which is OK in Java.  It's also OK in Clojure
without type hints; Clojure figures it all out at runtime.  However,
that was very slow.  When you add in type hints to get rid of all
reflection, you end up with a compile time cyclic dependency. My
solution was to define `Student` using `defrecord` (or `deftype`) in
the same namespace (and file) as `Students`, also defining an
interface for `Student`'s methods.  (I had to place one of `Students`'
methods *after* the `Student` class definition in order to type hint
it properly.)

Note: Sometimes if you modify and recompile a single Clojure
source file, without recompiling the others, you might get away with a
cyclic dependency.  You've fooled the compiler by adding the dependency
of class `A` on class `B` after `B` was already compiled.  When `B` was
compiled, there was no cycle, so this works.  However, when you
recompile all of the files, you'll either get a cyclic dependency
exception, or you will not be able to find an ordering of
classes/namespaces in the `:aot` specification in project.clj that will
allow you to compile all of the source files.  (It's even possible to
get this effect with multiple classes in a single source file.
Apparently, the compiler can reference a previously compiled version 
while recompiling a source file.)

Commit message:

added link to Emerick's flow chart

doc/general/ClojureMASONinteropTips.md, after:

Tips for using MASON with Clojure
====
Marshall Abrams

## Where to start?

These notes don't provide introductions or tutorials for Clojure or
MASON.  MASON has a detailed PDF manual that begins with a tutorial and
a example.

To read the MASON manual, you'll need to know a little bit of Java or
have enough experience to figure it out as you read.  (My "majure" repo
includes some Clojure implementations of the Students example from the
MASON tutorial.)

You will also have to learn a bit more about Clojure-Java interop than
is usually necessary, but studying the source under masonclj's *example*
directory with the MASON manual, the MASON classdocs tree, and good
Clojure interop resources at hand might be a reasonable learning strategy.


## Sequences, etc.

Any Java class that implements `java.util.Collection` can be used
with Clojure sequence/list-oriented functions: `map`, `reduce`,
`filter`, `vec`, etc.  This is very convenient--for example for working
with the contents of a MASON `sim.util.Bag`.

Clojure allows you to create Java arrays of primitives using
functions such as `double-array`.  You can set values in arrays of
primitives efficiently using functions such as `aset-double`.
You can access the values efficiently using `aset` with type hints.

Many Clojure functions generate lazy sequences.  One has to be very
careful with these when dealing with mutable state.  Sometimes it's a
good idea to wrap a result in `doall` to cause a lazy sequence to be
realized immediately.



## Setting the name in the title bar

### How to do it

MASON sets the title of the main window by calling `getName()` in the
subclass of `GUIState`, if that function exists.  `getName` should
return a string.  If `getName()` is missing, MASON sets the window title
to the (unqualified) class name of the subclass.

`getName()` is static in `GUIState`.  You can't actually override a
static method, normally, in the sense that the method to run would be
chosen at runtime by the actual class used.  Rather, with a static
method, the declared class of a variable determines at compile time
which method to call.  *But* MASON uses reflection to figure out which
method to call at runtime.  Nevertheless, this means that we need a
declaration in :methods, which you would not do for overriding
non-static methods from a superclass.  Also, the declaration should be
declared static using metadata placed *before the entire declaration
vector*.

```
(ns 
  ...
  (:gen-class 
    ...
    :methods [^:static [getName [] java.lang.String]] ; see comment on the implementation below
 ))

...

(defn -getName [] "example app")
```

See https://stackoverflow.com/questions/26425098/how-to-generate-generate-static-methods-with-clojures-gen-class
for the syntax for declaring a method static in `gen-class`.


### How not to do it

The preceding means that you don't have to and should not do the
following (which would be natural in other contexts).

When a method has multiple arities in the super, you you can use a
Clojure multiple-arity method.  But if there are different *types* to
the arguments, then you have to distinguish them by tacking type
specifiers on to the name of the method!

Example:

```
(defn -getName-void [this] "free-agent") 
```

See:

https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/clojure/TVRsy4Gnf70

https://puredanger.github.io/tech.puredanger.com/2011/08/12/subclassing-in-clojure (in which Alex Miller of all people learns from random others)

http://stackoverflow.com/questions/32773861/clojure-gen-class-for-overloaded-and-overridden-methods

http://dishevelled.net/Tricky-uses-of-Clojure-gen-class-and-AOT-compilation.html


## Lessons from the Students model

The following remarks came from experiments implementing MASON's Students
example in Clojure (see the <a
href="https://github.com/mars0i/majure">majure</a> repo).  Specific
versions of the Students model mentioned below can be found in that
repo.

This document reflects my focus at the time on producing Clojure/MASON
code  that was as fast as possible.  After the majure experiments, I
applied what I'd learned in the <a
href="https://github.com/mars0i/intermittran">intermittran</a> repo.
The resulting code in intermittran is not very idiomatic to Clojure, and
unpleasant, imo.  My current approach is to worry more about trying to
write (relatively) idiomatic Clojure than trying to eke out as much
speed from MASON as possible, but this  document provides the background
for my current approach.

Specifically, my goal was to see what's involved in writing a MASON
simulation using only Clojure by using Clojure to rewrite the Students
simulation in chapter 2 of the v18 MASON manual.  In the *majure* git
repo there are several versions of Students--each exploring different
ways of writing the Students simulation.

These notes aren't intended to be self-explanatory to someone who's
unfamiliar with Clojure or unfamiliar with MASON, and it may be that there
are errors, since I'm not on expert on Clojure, Java, or MASON.


### General

Note that while Clojure emphasizes pure functional programming, MASON is
designed for routine use of mutable data structures.  I didn't try to
fight this aspect of MASON in my versions of the Students simulation,
but I did try to make it clear in my code what parts were purely
functional and what parts were not.  It's important to have a clear view
of this distinction; otherwise mixing with Clojure's lazy sequences are
likely to cause problems at some point.

Clojure makes it very easy to call methods on Java classes using its
Clojure's dot syntax.  The notes below focus on less simple aspects of
Clojure-Java interop, including more intimate Clojure-Java
interoperability involving subclassing, interface implementation, and
defining methods so that they can be found by MASON's Java classes.


### Students

There are four classes defined in the Students simulation:

* `Student`, which implements `sim.engine.Steppable`
* `Students`, which extends `sim.engine.SimState`
* `StudentsWithUI`, which extends `sim.display.GUIState`.
* An inner class in `Students`, which implements `Steppable`.

I tried out various methods to define these classes in Clojure.
In the end, I settled on using the `gen-class` macro to define
`Students` and `StudentsWithUI`, `deftype` to define `Students`, and
`reify` to define the inner class.  Other options are possible for the
last two cases.  See below for details.


### Classes

There are five ways to make classes in Clojure:

* `defrecord`
* `deftype`
* `reify`
* `proxy`
* `gen-class`

The *alternativeStudentClasses* version of my Students-in-Clojure
program contains files illustrating alternative ways of defining the
`Student` class using each of these options.  See the README.me file in
that directory for information about their speed differences.

All of the five class creation macros allow implementing interfaces.
but only `proxy` and `gen-class` allow you to extend a class (such as
`SimState`).  However, `proxy` is potentially the slowest of the five
methods, because it uses an extra level of indirection to execute
methods, and it's more limited than `gen-class` in many ways.  I think
that `proxy` is unlikely to be a good choice for use with MASON if you
want optimal speed, but it might be useful in the GUI, if you don't care
about optimal speed there.  You can use `reify` instead, for example, to
create a Clojure equivalent of an inner class, if the class doesn't need
to extend a class. Neither `reify` nor `proxy` has built-in ways to
store state, though you may be able to use a closure, perhaps with atoms
or some other reference type, to associate state with a `reify` or
`proxy` object.

Note that I tried using `reify`, `proxy`, and `gen-class` to define the
inner class in `Students`.  They were all equally fast.  I suspect that
the `proxy` version was no slower simply because this class doesn't do
much.  Note that `proxy` was much slower than `reify` when used to
define the `Student` class in *alternativeStudentClasses*.

Overall, `gen-class` is the most flexible way to create classes in
Clojure, but it's the most complicated method, as well.  I used it
define `Students`, subclassing `SimState`, and to define
`StudentsWithUI`, subclassing `GUIState`.  I don't think `proxy` can do
everything needed for these cases.

`defrecord` is routinely used in Clojure.  `deftype` provides similar
basic functionality.  Both can be used to define a named class that
implements interfaces, but neither can extend another class.  In my
tests with Students, `deftype` was a lot faster than `defrecord`
(2X-4X).

The reason for the speed difference between `defrecord` and `deftype`
is interesting.  `defrecord` and `deftype` are equally fast at
(immutable) field access, and I see no reason to think they would
differ in method invocation speed.  However, `defrecord` automatically
defines some associated functions that `deftype` does not.  Among
other things, `defrecord` defines Java `equals()` and `hashCode()`
methods so that they will reflect the contents of a record's fields,
and not just its bare identity.  This means, for example, that two
distinct records of the same type and the same field contents will be
`=` in Clojure, while distinct `deftype` objects with the same
contents will not.  In addition, I believe, computing a hash code or
equality for a record is more expensive than for a `deftype` object. 
Some of the MASON data structure objects used in the Students
simulation, such as `Continuous2D`, use hashtables.  I believe that's
the reason that `deftype` is so much faster than `defrecord` in
Students.  (Note that although you can override some `Object` methods
on records, you can't override `hashCode()` and `equals()`.)  The
lesson is that *if* you need a named class that doesn't extend a
class, *and* you are using something like `Continuous2D` that uses
hashtables to store agents, then you have to decide whether you'd
rather have the speed of `deftype` or the additional functionality of
`defrecord` (e.g. the ability to initialize new instances from Clojure
maps).  [Steven Yi and others on the Clojure Google group helped me to
understand all  of this.]  If your agents are stored on a grid with a
finite number of cells, however, this difference between `defrecord`
and `deftype` probably won't matter.  MASON implements this kind of
grid with Java arrays, and finding an object in arrays just involves
indexing into them.

Note: You might also find Chas Emerick's
[Flowchart for choosing the right Clojure type definition form](https://cemerick.com/2011/07/05/flowchart-for-choosing-the-right-clojure-type-definition-form)
a useful heuristic, but note that there may be cases in which a
different choice is warranted.


### Mutable state

Only `deftype` allows mutable fields, and only using the
`:unsynchronized-mutable` or `:volatile-mutable` keywords.  (There is a
scary warning about these options in the docstring for `deftype`, but my
understanding is that these options are unproblematic as long as you're
not going to have multiple threads accessing the same field.)

(`gen-class` allows you to define a single field using the `:state`
keyword, but it's `final` in Java terms, which is to say that it can't
be changed after it's initialized by the function that you declare
using the `:init` keyword.)

One way to get an effect like multiple mutable fields with `gen-class`,
`defrecord`, or non-mutable fields with `deftype`, is to use one of
Clojure's reference types.  

For example, to have mutable state with `gen-class`, you can store
Clojure atoms in a Clojure `defrecord` object that's stored in the state
variable.

Another alternative is to store a `deftype` object  with mutable fields
in the state variable.  `deftype` with mutable fields was a little bit
faster than `defrecord` with atoms; I used `deftype` to go from 50% of
Java speed to 60% of Java speed.  (Using `deftype` for this purpose is
very verbose, though--I ended up with four similar signatures for each
field.  It might be worth writing a macro to generate all of the
relevant code.  This is a little tricky, though, if you want to use type
hints--which you do, if you're going to the trouble of using mutable
fields with `deftype` just for a small additional performance benefit.)

Another alternative is to store data in the state field using Java
arrays, which you can create in Clojure using functions such as
`make-array` and `double-array`.

Note that there's no problem with using fields inherited from a
superclass defined in Java from within the same Clojure class definition
(usually: the same namespace).  They can be accessed as if they were
Java methods called from Clojure, i.e. with expressions such as
`(.random students)` to get the random number generator defined in the
SimState superclass of the `Students`.  You can modify these instance
variables using `set!`.


### Interfaces

The are three ways to define interfaces:

* `defprotocol`
* `definterface`
* `gen-interface`

For use with MASON, it's not clear that it matters whether you use
`defprotocol` or `definterface`.  I've gotten the same speed with both.
`definterface` requires that you use type specifications.  Type hints
are allowed but ignored on `defprotocol`.  `defprotocol` provides more
conveniences for use with Clojure.

`gen-interface` allows you to extend another interface, but
this probably isn't needed.  For example, it was easy to define
`Student` implement both `Steppable` and an interface I defined.
(`definterface` is a simple wrapper around `gen-interface`, and it's
probably better style to use `definterface` if you don't need
`gen-interface`'s extra functionality.  However, unlike `gen-class`,
`gen-interface` is simple to use.)

### Type hints

Type hints *can* sometimes make a *huge* difference in speed, when used
to avoid reflection in code that executes often.  `(set!
*warn-on-reflection* true)` will turn on reflection compilation
warnings.  I try to restrict type hints to use in and near parameter
lists, but sometimes I've needed to stick them in the middle of a
function's code.  Sometimes you can avoid type hints using
`definterface` or `gen-interface` (and maybe `defprotocol`--I'm not
sure).


### Cyclic dependencies

Clojure doesn't allow compile-time cyclic dependencies between
classes. For example, without type hints, giving the `Students` and
`Student` classes their own namespaces (in separate source files, as
usual) worked fine.  These classes refer to each other's methods and
fields repeatedly, which is OK in Java.  It's also OK in Clojure
without type hints; Clojure figures it all out at runtime.  However,
that was very slow.  When you add in type hints to get rid of all
reflection, you end up with a compile time cyclic dependency. My
solution was to define `Student` using `defrecord` (or `deftype`) in
the same namespace (and file) as `Students`, also defining an
interface for `Student`'s methods.  (I had to place one of `Students`'
methods *after* the `Student` class definition in order to type hint
it properly.)

Note: Sometimes if you modify and recompile a single Clojure
source file, without recompiling the others, you might get away with a
cyclic dependency.  You've fooled the compiler by adding the dependency
of class `A` on class `B` after `B` was already compiled.  When `B` was
compiled, there was no cycle, so this works.  However, when you
recompile all of the files, you'll either get a cyclic dependency
exception, or you will not be able to find an ordering of
classes/namespaces in the `:aot` specification in project.clj that will
allow you to compile all of the source files.  (It's even possible to
get this effect with multiple classes in a single source file.
Apparently, the compiler can reference a previously compiled version 
while recompiling a source file.)
