doc/masonclj/params.md, before:

`masonclj.params`
====
Marshall Abrams

`masonclj.params` provides `defparams`, a Clojure macro.

## Rationale

`masonclj.params/defparams` is a macro with two goals:

1. Generate a series of coordinated definitions for model parameters.
2. Move global configuration data into its own namespace.

### 1. Coordinating parameter code

The reason for the second goal is that Mason provides a
convenient way to allow users to customize configuration variables in
the GUI.  If you set up certain Java bean-style accessors for your
configuation variables,  the configuration controls magically appear.
However, Mason is designed to be used in a way that's perfectly
reasonable in Java, but that Clojure's designers don't really like.
Clojure will do what's necessary, but it doesn't go out of its way to
make it convenient.  As a result, for each variable that you want to
be configurable via the GUI, you need to provide:

1. Two to three bean-ish accessor functions.
2. Two to three corresponding signatures, in a `gen-class` specification,
which cannot be immediately next to the bean function definitions.
3. An entry in a data structure such as a defrecord or map, defined
somewhere else.
4. A value for that entry in an intializer function, defined somewhere
else again.
5. Optionally, a commandline option that will allow setting the
variable from the command line.

So when you add, delete, or change the definion of a configuration
variable, all the above elements have to be kept coordinated.  This is
inconvenient and bug-prone.

`defparams` does all of the above for you: You pass it a single line of 
configuration info, and it does the rest.  This means that it does a 
lot of things in way that's usually hidden, and you just have to know 
part of what it's doing--see below--but the alternative is worse.

### 2. A special global-data namespace

`defparams` defines a map for global parameters.  Although some of the
methods that deal with it are in your `SimState` subclass, the map
itself is in its own special namespace. The purpose of this to avoid
problems with cyclic dependencies when adding many type hints to avoid
reflection.  Clojure's `genclass` is its the most flexible way to
subclass a Java class, and it seems to be subclassing MASON's `SimState`
class.  The problem is that your `SimsState` subclass will normally
register events to be run in `SimState`'s main loop, and these events
will call your other Clojure namespaces.  So far, so good.  In turn
these namespaces will probably need to reference some global
configuration data, and may update some global data on the model.  The
natural place to put all of this is in an instance variable of your
`SimState` subclass.  (`genclass` actually allows defining only a single
instance variable, but you can put a map or whatever you want in it to
store different bits of data.)  Now, this would mean that there's a
cyclic dependency, because the `SimState` subclass refers to the other
namespaces, and they refer to its data element.  Clojure will refuse to
compile certain cyclic dependencies, but *this kind is OK*.  That is,
it's OK *as long as you don't start adding certain sorts of type hints*
to your code.  (Clojure type hints are somewhat like type specifications
in statically typed languages such as Java, but they are optional, and
uncommon in Clojure. Clojure type hints can speed up code in some
situations (and can occasionally make it slower).)  For example, if you
add type hints referencing your `SimState` subclass in one of your
model's namespaces, and then also add type hints in the `SimState`
subclass  referencing the namespace that has a type hint for the
subclass, the Clojure compiler will be very unhappy about it.  (There
are additional remarks about cyclic dependenceis in
[doc/ClojureMASONinteropTips.md](https://github.com/mars0i/masonclj/blob/master/doc/ClojureMASONinteropTips.md).)

(Note that while there is usually a one-to-one correspondence between
Clojure source files and Clojure namespaces, the code generated by
`defparams` switches between namespaces in one file.  You can see that
below in the macroexpansion of a `defparams` call below.)

## Using `defparams`

### Things you must provide:

`defparams` requires that the subclass of Mason's `SimState` be
named `Sim`.  (It wouldn't be hard to modify defparams.clj to allow it to
discover the name of the `SimState` subclass, but I don't have a need
for this change.  If you use `defparams`, and this bothers you, let me
know and I'll fix it.)

You also must typically precede the call to `defparams` with this:

```clojure
(def commandline$ (atom nil))
```

I couldn't figure out how to move this into the `defparams` definition.
(I name variables that contain atoms with "$" as a suffix.)

### The `defparams` call

Here's an example of use of the `defparams` macro from *masonclj/example/src/example/Sim.clj*.  (You can see what it expands into [below](#what-defparams-expands-to).)


```clojure
(mp/defparams  [;field name   initial-value type  in gui? with range?
                [num-r-snipes       25      long    [0,500]  ["-R" "Size of r-snipe subpopulation"
                                                              :parse-fn #(Long. %)]]
                [max-energy         20.0    double  true     ["-e" "Maximum energy level for snipes."
                                                              :parse-fn #(Double. %)]]
                [env-width          40      long    [10,250] ["-W" "Width of env.  Must be an even number."
                                                              :parse-fn #(Long. %)]]
                [env-height         40      long    [10,250] ["-H" "Height of env. Must be an even number."
                                                              :parse-fn #(Long. %)]]
                [env-display-size   12.0    double  false    ["-G" "How large to display the env in gui."
                                                              :parse-fn #(Double. %)]]
                [use-gui           false    boolean false    ["-g" "If -g, use GUI; otherwise GUI if +g or no options."
                                                              :parse-fn #(Boolean. %)]]
                [seed               nil     long    false]  ; convenience field to store Sim's seed
                [in-gui           false     boolean false]] ; convenience field to store Boolean re whether in GUI
  :exposes-methods {finish superFinish} ; name for function to call finish() in the superclass
  :methods [[getPopSize [] long]] ; Signatures for Java-visible methods that won't be autogenerated, but be defined below.
 )
```

The comments above the call describe the elements of the first argument.
I show below what this expands to in another section.

For each element in that first argument--a vector of vectors--`defparams`
generates code that performs some or all of the five functions listed in
a previous section.  

Along the way, `defparams` defines, in a separate namespace
`<your prefix>.data`, a defrecord named `SimData`.  An instance of this
defrecord will be put into the "state" variable of your `Sim` class
instance (i.e. the class that inherits from Mason's `sim.engine.SimState`).
This state variable, named `simData`, is the only instance variable that 
Clojure's `gen-class` allows.  We wrap a `SimData` record in an atom, 
and make that atom the value of `Sim`'s instance variable `simData`.

The fields of the `SimData` defrecord are named by the first elements
of the inner vectors in the first argument to `defparams`.

Values of the fields in this `SimData` are initialized when your `Sim`
class is created.  The initial values are the second elements of the inner
vectors in `defparams`'s argument.

The remaining elements in the inner vectors are used to define (a)
Bean-style accessor functions that Mason will use to create GUI elements
which will allow a user to change the values in the `SimData` defrecord
(using `swap!` and `assoc` behind the scenes), and (b) command line options
that allow setting these same values.  The docstring below says a bit more
about this.

Here is `defparams`'s docstring (lightly formatted):

`defparams`  
([fields & addl-gen-class-opts])  
Macro  
`defparams` generates Java-bean style and other MASON-style accessors; a gen-class
expression in which their signatures are defined along with an instance
variable containing a Clojure map for their corresponding values; an
initializer function for the map; and a call to
clojure.tools.cli/parse-opts to define corresponding commandline
options.  `fields` is a sequence of 4- or 5-element sequences starting
with names of fields in which configuration data will be stored and
accessed, followed by initial values and a Java type identifiers for the
field.  The fourth element is either false to indicate that the field
should not be configurable from the GUI, or truthy if it is.  In the
latter case, it may be a two-element sequence containing default min and
max values to be used for sliders in the GUI.  (This range doesn't
constraint fields' values in any other respect.) The fifth element, if
present, specifies short commandline option lists for use by
`cli-options`, except that the second, long option specifier should be
left out; it will be generated from the parameter name.  The following
`gen-class` options will automatically be provided in the expansion of
`defparams`: `:state`, `:exposes-methods`, `:init`, `:main`, `:methods`.
Additional options can be provided in `addl-gen-class-opts` by
alternating `gen-class` option keywords with their intended values.  If
`addl-gen-class-opts` includes `:exposes-methods` or `:methods`, the
value(s) will be combined with automatically generated values for these
`gen-class` options.  Note: defparams must be used only in a namespace
named &lt;namespace prefix&gt;.Sim, where &lt;namespace prefix&gt; is the path
before the last dot of the current namespace.  Sim must be aot-compiled
in order for gen-class to work.

See the expansion of the above code, below, for details about what
`defparams` does.


### Accessing configuration data

You can access the global configuration data in the `SimData` defrecord
stored in the `simData` instance variable of your class `Sim` by getting
`simData` from `Sim` and then defref'ing the atom inside `simData`.  For
example, if `sim` contains your `Sim` instance:

```clojure
(let [sim-data$ (.simData sim)
      sim-data @sim-data$
      my-config-param-1 (:my-config-param-1 sim-data)
      my-config-param-2 (:my-config-param-2 sim-data)]
   (do-things-with my-config-param-1 my-config-param-2))
```

Or you can do it in one step:

```clojure
   (do-something-with (:my-config-param-3 @(.simData sim)))
```

For example, I do this in the `-start` function in Sim.clj. 

To use this configuration data, your code obviously has to have had
access to the `Sim` instance at some point.  Some examples:

In the `-start` function in `Sim`, the `Sim` instance is passed as the
sole argument, which would often be called `this`.

If your `-start` function calls or schedules some central routines
that run the simulation, you can pass in your `Sim` instance,
the atom wrapping your `SimData`, or the `SimData` itself, so that
your code can access the configuration data stored in it.

In your GUI class--let's say it's named "GUI"--which inherits from
Mason's `sim.display.GUIState`, the `Sim` instance will usually be
accessible using the `getState()` accessor that `GUI` inherits from
`GUIState`.  For example, your `setup-portrayals` function might start
like this:

```clojure
(defn setup-portrayals
  [this-gui]
  (let [sim (.getState this-gui)
        sim-data$ (.simData sim)
           ...                  ]
    ...))
```

## What `defparams` expands to

The code below shows what the [above `defparams` call](#the-defparams-call) from
*example/src/example/Sim.clj* expands into.  I generated this code by running
`lein repl` from the toplevel *example* directory under *masonclj*,
then running:
```clojure
(in-ns 'example.Sim)
(require '[masonclj.params :as mp])
```
before passing the `defparams` expression in Sim.clj, single-quoted,
to `(clojure.pprint/pprint (macroexpand-1 ...))`.  I reformatted the output
a bit and added comments.
```clojure
(do
 ;; Define a special namespace for global data with a structure for the data:
 (clojure.core/ns example.data)
 (clojure.core/defrecord SimData [num-r-snipes max-energy env-width
                                  env-height env-display-size use-gui
                                  seed in-gui])

 ;; Now back to the namespace in which defparams was invoked:
 (clojure.core/ns example.Sim
  (:require [example.data]) ; so we can access the global data structure
  (:import example.Sim)     ; weird, but seems to be needed
  ;; gen-class allows us to inherit anything we want from MASON's superclass:
  (:gen-class
   :name example.Sim
   :extends sim.engine.SimState
   :state simData ; gen-class allows only one (!) instance var; it will hold a SimData.
   :exposes-methods {start superStart, finish superFinish} ; superclass method aliases
   :init init-sim-data
   :main true   ; we do want a main()
   ;; Declare methods that we want the MASON GUI to find and invoke:
   :methods [[getNumRSnipes [] long]      
             [setNumRSnipes [long] void]
             [getMaxEnergy [] double]
             [setMaxEnergy [double] void]
             [getEnvWidth [] long]
             [setEnvWidth [long] void]
             [getEnvHeight [] long]
             [setEnvHeight [long] void]
             [domNumRSnipes [] java.lang.Object] ; causes GUI to make sliders
             [domEnvWidth [] java.lang.Object]
             [domEnvHeight [] java.lang.Object]
             [getPopSize [] long]]))
 ;; end of gen-class and ns
 
 ;; Function that initializes the simData state var:
 (clojure.core/defn -init-sim-data [seed]
   [[seed] (clojure.core/atom
             (example.data/->SimData 25 20.0 40 40 12.0 false nil false))])

 ;; Now start defining those methods we declared above:
 ;; These cause GUI to make fields displaying data:
 (defn -getNumRSnipes [this] (:num-r-snipes @(.simData this)))
 (defn -getMaxEnergy [this] (:max-energy @(.simData this)))
 (defn -getEnvWidth [this] (:env-width @(.simData this)))
 (defn -getEnvHeight [this] (:env-height @(.simData this)))
 ;; These cause GUI to make the fields editable:
 (defn -setNumRSnipes
   [this newval]
   (clojure.core/swap! (.simData this) clojure.core/assoc :num-r-snipes newval))
 (defn -setMaxEnergy
   [this newval]
   (clojure.core/swap! (.simData this) clojure.core/assoc:max-energy newval))
 (defn -setEnvWidth
   [this newval]
   (clojure.core/swap! (.simData this) clojure.core/assoc :env-width newval))
 (defn -setEnvHeight
   [this newval]
   (clojure.core/swap! (.simData this) clojure.core/assoc :env-height newval))
 ;; If these exist, GUI makes sliders, not just editable fields:
 (defn -domNumRSnipes [this] (Interval. 0 500))
 (defn -domEnvWidth [this] (Interval. 10 250))
 (defn -domEnvHeight [this] (Interval. 10 250))

 ;; Function to parse and store command line args so they can be 
 ;; found later.  It uses clojure clojure.tools/cli to manage the
 ;; command line interaction:.
 (clojure.core/defn record-commandline-args!
  "Temporarily store values of parameters passed on the command line."
  [args__970__auto__]
  (clojure.core/let
    [cli-options [["-?" "--help" "Print this help message."]
                  ["-R" "--num-r-snipes <long> (25)" "Size of r-snipe subpopulation"
                   :parse-fn (fn* [p1__1553#] (Long. p1__1553#))]
                  ["-e" "--max-energy <double> (20.0)" "Maximum energy level for snipes."
                   :parse-fn (fn* [p1__1554#] (Double. p1__1554#))]
                  ["-W" "--env-width <long> (40)" "Width of env.  Must be an even number."
                   :parse-fn (fn* [p1__1555#] (Long. p1__1555#))]
                  ["-H" "--env-height <long> (40)" "Height of env. Must be an even number."
                   :parse-fn (fn* [p1__1556#] (Long. p1__1556#))]
                  ["-G" "--env-display-size <double> (12.0)" "How large to display the env in gui."
                   :parse-fn (fn* [p1__1557#] (Double. p1__1557#))]
                  ["-g" "--use-gui" "If -g, use GUI; otherwise GUI if +g or no options."
                   :parse-fn (fn* [p1__1558#] (Boolean. p1__1558#))]]
     usage-fmt__971__auto__ ; the second let binding
       (clojure.core/fn
         [options]
         (clojure.core/let [fmt-line (clojure.core/fn [[short-opt long-opt desc]]
                                        (clojure.core/str short-opt ", " long-opt ": " desc))]
            (clojure.string/join "\n" (clojure.core/concat (clojure.core/map fmt-line options)))))
     {:as cmdline, :keys [options arguments errors summary]} ; a destructuring let binding
       (clojure.tools.cli/parse-opts args__970__auto__ cli-options)] ; finally the end of the let
       ;; Process the command line args:
       ;; Error handling
       (clojure.core/when errors
         (clojure.core/run! clojure.core/println errors)
         (clojure.core/println "MASON options should appear at the end of the command line after '--'.")
         (java.lang.System/exit 1))
       ;; Help request handling: Second println will print out options and descriptions:
       (clojure.core/when (:help options)
         (clojure.core/println "Command line options (defaults in parentheses):")
         (clojure.core/println (usage-fmt__971__auto__ cli-options))
         (clojure.core/println "MASON options can also be used after these options and after '--'.")
         (clojure.core/println "For example, you can use -for to stop after a specific number of steps.")
         (clojure.core/println "-help (note single dash): Print help message for MASON.")
         (java.lang.System/exit 0))
       ;; store data in example.Sim/commandline$ global so start routines can find it:
       (clojure.core/reset! commandline$ cmdline))))
```

Commit message:

Moved def commandline$ from Sim.clj to params.clj
Changed params.md to reflect this.

doc/masonclj/params.md, after:

`masonclj.params`
====
Marshall Abrams

`masonclj.params` provides `defparams`, a Clojure macro.

## Rationale

`masonclj.params/defparams` is a macro with two goals:

1. Generate a series of coordinated definitions for model parameters.
2. Move global configuration data into its own namespace.

### 1. Coordinating parameter code

The reason for the second goal is that Mason provides a
convenient way to allow users to customize configuration variables in
the GUI.  If you set up certain Java bean-style accessors for your
configuation variables,  the configuration controls magically appear.
However, Mason is designed to be used in a way that's perfectly
reasonable in Java, but that Clojure's designers don't really like.
Clojure will do what's necessary, but it doesn't go out of its way to
make it convenient.  As a result, for each variable that you want to
be configurable via the GUI, you need to provide:

1. Two to three bean-ish accessor functions.
2. Two to three corresponding signatures, in a `gen-class` specification,
which cannot be immediately next to the bean function definitions.
3. An entry in a data structure such as a defrecord or map, defined
somewhere else.
4. A value for that entry in an intializer function, defined somewhere
else again.
5. Optionally, a commandline option that will allow setting the
variable from the command line.

So when you add, delete, or change the definion of a configuration
variable, all the above elements have to be kept coordinated.  This is
inconvenient and bug-prone.

`defparams` does all of the above for you: You pass it a single line of 
configuration info, and it does the rest.  This means that it does a 
lot of things in way that's usually hidden, and you just have to know 
part of what it's doing--see below--but the alternative is worse.

### 2. A special global-data namespace

`defparams` defines a map for global parameters.  Although some of the
methods that deal with it are in your `SimState` subclass, the map
itself is in its own special namespace. The purpose of this to avoid
problems with cyclic dependencies when adding many type hints to avoid
reflection.  Clojure's `genclass` is its the most flexible way to
subclass a Java class, and it seems to be subclassing MASON's `SimState`
class.  The problem is that your `SimsState` subclass will normally
register events to be run in `SimState`'s main loop, and these events
will call your other Clojure namespaces.  So far, so good.  In turn
these namespaces will probably need to reference some global
configuration data, and may update some global data on the model.  The
natural place to put all of this is in an instance variable of your
`SimState` subclass.  (`genclass` actually allows defining only a single
instance variable, but you can put a map or whatever you want in it to
store different bits of data.)  Now, this would mean that there's a
cyclic dependency, because the `SimState` subclass refers to the other
namespaces, and they refer to its data element.  Clojure will refuse to
compile certain cyclic dependencies, but *this kind is OK*.  That is,
it's OK *as long as you don't start adding certain sorts of type hints*
to your code.  (Clojure type hints are somewhat like type specifications
in statically typed languages such as Java, but they are optional, and
uncommon in Clojure. Clojure type hints can speed up code in some
situations (and can occasionally make it slower).)  For example, if you
add type hints referencing your `SimState` subclass in one of your
model's namespaces, and then also add type hints in the `SimState`
subclass  referencing the namespace that has a type hint for the
subclass, the Clojure compiler will be very unhappy about it.  (There
are additional remarks about cyclic dependenceis in
[doc/ClojureMASONinteropTips.md](https://github.com/mars0i/masonclj/blob/master/doc/ClojureMASONinteropTips.md).)

(Note that while there is usually a one-to-one correspondence between
Clojure source files and Clojure namespaces, the code generated by
`defparams` switches between namespaces in one file.  You can see that
below in the macroexpansion of a `defparams` call below.)

## Using `defparams`

### Things you must provide:

`defparams` requires that the subclass of Mason's `SimState` be
named `Sim`.  (It wouldn't be hard to modify defparams.clj to allow it to
discover the name of the `SimState` subclass, but I don't have a need
for this change.  If you use `defparams`, and this bothers you, let me
know and I'll fix it.)

### The `defparams` call

Here's an example of use of the `defparams` macro from *masonclj/example/src/example/Sim.clj*.  (You can see what it expands into [below](#what-defparams-expands-to).)


```clojure
(mp/defparams  [;field name   initial-value type  in gui? with range?
                [num-r-snipes       25      long    [0,500]  ["-R" "Size of r-snipe subpopulation"
                                                              :parse-fn #(Long. %)]]
                [max-energy         20.0    double  true     ["-e" "Maximum energy level for snipes."
                                                              :parse-fn #(Double. %)]]
                [env-width          40      long    [10,250] ["-W" "Width of env.  Must be an even number."
                                                              :parse-fn #(Long. %)]]
                [env-height         40      long    [10,250] ["-H" "Height of env. Must be an even number."
                                                              :parse-fn #(Long. %)]]
                [env-display-size   12.0    double  false    ["-G" "How large to display the env in gui."
                                                              :parse-fn #(Double. %)]]
                [use-gui           false    boolean false    ["-g" "If -g, use GUI; otherwise GUI if +g or no options."
                                                              :parse-fn #(Boolean. %)]]
                [seed               nil     long    false]  ; convenience field to store Sim's seed
                [in-gui           false     boolean false]] ; convenience field to store Boolean re whether in GUI
  :exposes-methods {finish superFinish} ; name for function to call finish() in the superclass
  :methods [[getPopSize [] long]] ; Signatures for Java-visible methods that won't be autogenerated, but be defined below.
 )
```

The comments above the call describe the elements of the first argument.
I show below what this expands to in another section.

For each element in that first argument--a vector of vectors--`defparams`
generates code that performs some or all of the five functions listed in
a previous section.  

Along the way, `defparams` defines, in a separate namespace
`<your prefix>.data`, a defrecord named `SimData`.  An instance of this
defrecord will be put into the "state" variable of your `Sim` class
instance (i.e. the class that inherits from Mason's `sim.engine.SimState`).
This state variable, named `simData`, is the only instance variable that 
Clojure's `gen-class` allows.  We wrap a `SimData` record in an atom, 
and make that atom the value of `Sim`'s instance variable `simData`.

The fields of the `SimData` defrecord are named by the first elements
of the inner vectors in the first argument to `defparams`.

Values of the fields in this `SimData` are initialized when your `Sim`
class is created.  The initial values are the second elements of the inner
vectors in `defparams`'s argument.

The remaining elements in the inner vectors are used to define (a)
Bean-style accessor functions that Mason will use to create GUI elements
which will allow a user to change the values in the `SimData` defrecord
(using `swap!` and `assoc` behind the scenes), and (b) command line options
that allow setting these same values.  The docstring below says a bit more
about this.

Here is `defparams`'s docstring (lightly formatted):

`defparams`  
([fields & addl-gen-class-opts])  
Macro  
`defparams` generates Java-bean style and other MASON-style accessors; a gen-class
expression in which their signatures are defined along with an instance
variable containing a Clojure map for their corresponding values; an
initializer function for the map; and a call to
clojure.tools.cli/parse-opts to define corresponding commandline
options, whose values will be stored in a map in an atom in `commandline$`.
`fields` is a sequence of 4- or 5-element sequences starting
with names of fields in which configuration data will be stored and
accessed, followed by initial values and a Java type identifiers for the
field.  The fourth element is either false to indicate that the field
should not be configurable from the GUI, or truthy if it is.  In the
latter case, it may be a two-element sequence containing default min and
max values to be used for sliders in the GUI.  (This range doesn't
constraint fields' values in any other respect.) The fifth element, if
present, specifies short commandline option lists for use by
`cli-options`, except that the second, long option specifier should be
left out; it will be generated from the parameter name.  The following
`gen-class` options will automatically be provided in the expansion of
`defparams`: `:state`, `:exposes-methods`, `:init`, `:main`, `:methods`.
Additional options can be provided in `addl-gen-class-opts` by
alternating `gen-class` option keywords with their intended values.  If
`addl-gen-class-opts` includes `:exposes-methods` or `:methods`, the
value(s) will be combined with automatically generated values for these
`gen-class` options.  Note: defparams must be used only in a namespace
named &lt;namespace prefix&gt;.Sim, where &lt;namespace prefix&gt; is the path
before the last dot of the current namespace.  Sim must be aot-compiled
in order for gen-class to work.

See the expansion of the above code, below, for details about what
`defparams` does.


### Accessing configuration data

You can access the global configuration data in the `SimData` defrecord
stored in the `simData` instance variable of your class `Sim` by getting
`simData` from `Sim` and then defref'ing the atom inside `simData`.  For
example, if `sim` contains your `Sim` instance:

```clojure
(let [sim-data$ (.simData sim)
      sim-data @sim-data$
      my-config-param-1 (:my-config-param-1 sim-data)
      my-config-param-2 (:my-config-param-2 sim-data)]
   (do-things-with my-config-param-1 my-config-param-2))
```

Or you can do it in one step:

```clojure
   (do-something-with (:my-config-param-3 @(.simData sim)))
```

For example, I do this in the `-start` function in Sim.clj. 

To use this configuration data, your code obviously has to have had
access to the `Sim` instance at some point.  Some examples:

In the `-start` function in `Sim`, the `Sim` instance is passed as the
sole argument, which would often be called `this`.

If your `-start` function calls or schedules some central routines
that run the simulation, you can pass in your `Sim` instance,
the atom wrapping your `SimData`, or the `SimData` itself, so that
your code can access the configuration data stored in it.

In your GUI class--let's say it's named "GUI"--which inherits from
Mason's `sim.display.GUIState`, the `Sim` instance will usually be
accessible using the `getState()` accessor that `GUI` inherits from
`GUIState`.  For example, your `setup-portrayals` function might start
like this:

```clojure
(defn setup-portrayals
  [this-gui]
  (let [sim (.getState this-gui)
        sim-data$ (.simData sim)
           ...                  ]
    ...))
```

## What `defparams` expands to

The code below shows what the [above `defparams` call](#the-defparams-call) from
*example/src/example/Sim.clj* expands into.  I generated this code by running
`lein repl` from the toplevel *example* directory under *masonclj*,
then running:
```clojure
(in-ns 'example.Sim)
(require '[masonclj.params :as mp])
```
before passing the `defparams` expression in Sim.clj, single-quoted,
to `(clojure.pprint/pprint (macroexpand-1 ...))`.  I reformatted the output
a bit and added comments.
```clojure
(do
 ;; Define a special namespace for global data with a structure for the data:
 (clojure.core/ns example.data)
 (clojure.core/defrecord SimData [num-r-snipes max-energy env-width
                                  env-height env-display-size use-gui
                                  seed in-gui])

 ;; Now back to the namespace in which defparams was invoked:
 (clojure.core/ns example.Sim
  (:require [example.data]) ; so we can access the global data structure
  (:import example.Sim)     ; weird, but seems to be needed
  ;; gen-class allows us to inherit anything we want from MASON's superclass:
  (:gen-class
   :name example.Sim
   :extends sim.engine.SimState
   :state simData ; gen-class allows only one (!) instance var; it will hold a SimData.
   :exposes-methods {start superStart, finish superFinish} ; superclass method aliases
   :init init-sim-data
   :main true   ; we do want a main()
   ;; Declare methods that we want the MASON GUI to find and invoke:
   :methods [[getNumRSnipes [] long]      
             [setNumRSnipes [long] void]
             [getMaxEnergy [] double]
             [setMaxEnergy [double] void]
             [getEnvWidth [] long]
             [setEnvWidth [long] void]
             [getEnvHeight [] long]
             [setEnvHeight [long] void]
             [domNumRSnipes [] java.lang.Object] ; causes GUI to make sliders
             [domEnvWidth [] java.lang.Object]
             [domEnvHeight [] java.lang.Object]
             [getPopSize [] long]]))
 ;; end of gen-class and ns

 (def commandline$ (atom nil)) ; Used by record-commandline-args! below, and user code.
 
 ;; Function that initializes the simData state var:
 (clojure.core/defn -init-sim-data [seed]
   [[seed] (clojure.core/atom
             (example.data/->SimData 25 20.0 40 40 12.0 false nil false))])

 ;; Now start defining those methods we declared above:
 ;; These cause GUI to make fields displaying data:
 (defn -getNumRSnipes [this] (:num-r-snipes @(.simData this)))
 (defn -getMaxEnergy [this] (:max-energy @(.simData this)))
 (defn -getEnvWidth [this] (:env-width @(.simData this)))
 (defn -getEnvHeight [this] (:env-height @(.simData this)))
 ;; These cause GUI to make the fields editable:
 (defn -setNumRSnipes
   [this newval]
   (clojure.core/swap! (.simData this) clojure.core/assoc :num-r-snipes newval))
 (defn -setMaxEnergy
   [this newval]
   (clojure.core/swap! (.simData this) clojure.core/assoc:max-energy newval))
 (defn -setEnvWidth
   [this newval]
   (clojure.core/swap! (.simData this) clojure.core/assoc :env-width newval))
 (defn -setEnvHeight
   [this newval]
   (clojure.core/swap! (.simData this) clojure.core/assoc :env-height newval))
 ;; If these exist, GUI makes sliders, not just editable fields:
 (defn -domNumRSnipes [this] (Interval. 0 500))
 (defn -domEnvWidth [this] (Interval. 10 250))
 (defn -domEnvHeight [this] (Interval. 10 250))

 ;; Function to parse and store command line args so they can be 
 ;; found later.  It uses clojure clojure.tools/cli to manage the
 ;; command line interaction:.
 (clojure.core/defn record-commandline-args!
  "Temporarily store values of parameters passed on the command line."
  [args__970__auto__]
  (clojure.core/let
    [cli-options [["-?" "--help" "Print this help message."]
                  ["-R" "--num-r-snipes <long> (25)" "Size of r-snipe subpopulation"
                   :parse-fn (fn* [p1__1553#] (Long. p1__1553#))]
                  ["-e" "--max-energy <double> (20.0)" "Maximum energy level for snipes."
                   :parse-fn (fn* [p1__1554#] (Double. p1__1554#))]
                  ["-W" "--env-width <long> (40)" "Width of env.  Must be an even number."
                   :parse-fn (fn* [p1__1555#] (Long. p1__1555#))]
                  ["-H" "--env-height <long> (40)" "Height of env. Must be an even number."
                   :parse-fn (fn* [p1__1556#] (Long. p1__1556#))]
                  ["-G" "--env-display-size <double> (12.0)" "How large to display the env in gui."
                   :parse-fn (fn* [p1__1557#] (Double. p1__1557#))]
                  ["-g" "--use-gui" "If -g, use GUI; otherwise GUI if +g or no options."
                   :parse-fn (fn* [p1__1558#] (Boolean. p1__1558#))]]
     usage-fmt__971__auto__ ; the second let binding
       (clojure.core/fn
         [options]
         (clojure.core/let [fmt-line (clojure.core/fn [[short-opt long-opt desc]]
                                        (clojure.core/str short-opt ", " long-opt ": " desc))]
            (clojure.string/join "\n" (clojure.core/concat (clojure.core/map fmt-line options)))))
     {:as cmdline, :keys [options arguments errors summary]} ; a destructuring let binding
       (clojure.tools.cli/parse-opts args__970__auto__ cli-options)] ; finally the end of the let
       ;; Process the command line args:
       ;; Error handling
       (clojure.core/when errors
         (clojure.core/run! clojure.core/println errors)
         (clojure.core/println "MASON options should appear at the end of the command line after '--'.")
         (java.lang.System/exit 1))
       ;; Help request handling: Second println will print out options and descriptions:
       (clojure.core/when (:help options)
         (clojure.core/println "Command line options (defaults in parentheses):")
         (clojure.core/println (usage-fmt__971__auto__ cli-options))
         (clojure.core/println "MASON options can also be used after these options and after '--'.")
         (clojure.core/println "For example, you can use -for to stop after a specific number of steps.")
         (clojure.core/println "-help (note single dash): Print help message for MASON.")
         (java.lang.System/exit 0))
       ;; store data in example.Sim/commandline$ global so start routines can find it:
       (clojure.core/reset! commandline$ cmdline))))
```
